12. Information and Statistics
12.1 lastlog
List the last login time of all system users. This references the /var/log/lastlog file.
12.2 losf
List open files. This command outputs a detailed table of all currently open files and gives
information about their owner, size, the processes associated with them, and more. Of course, lsof
may be piped to grep and/or awk to parse and analyze its results.
lsof -an -i tcp
12.3 strace
System trace: diagnostic and debugging tool for tracing system calls and signals. This command and
ltrace, following, are useful for diagnosing why a given program or package fails to run . . . perhaps
due to missing libraries or related causes.
#trace df
12.4 ltrace
#ltrace df
Library trace: diagnostic and debugging tool that traces library calls invoked by a given command.
12.5 nmap
Network mapper and port scanner. This command scans a server to locate open ports and the services
associated with those ports. It can also report information about packet filters and firewalls. This is an
important security tool for locking down a network against hacking attempts.
12.6 nc
The nc (netcat) utility is a complete toolkit for connecting to and listening to TCP and UDP ports. It is
useful as a diagnostic and testing tool and as a component in simple script-based HTTP clients and
servers.
12.7 lsdev
List devices, that is, show installed hardware
12.8 dmesg 
Lists all system bootup messages to stdout. Handy for debugging and ascertaining which device
drivers were installed and which system interrupts in use. The output of dmesg may, of course, be
parsed with grep, sed, or awk from within a script.
12.9 stat
Gives detailed and verbose statistics on a given file (even a directory or device file) or set of files.
12.10 vmstat
Display virtual memory statistics.
12.11 uptime
Shows how long the system has been running, along with associated statistics.
12.12 sar
Invoking sar (System Activity Reporter) gives a very detailed rundown on system statistics
12.13 size
The size [/path/to/binary] command gives the segment sizes of a binary executable or archive file.
This is mainly of use to programmers. 
#size /bin/bash
12.14 logrotat
This utility manages the system log files, rotating, compressing, deleting, and/or e-mailing them, as
appropriate. This keeps the /var/log from getting cluttered with old log files. Usually cron runs
logrotate on a daily basis.
Adding an appropriate entry to /etc/logrotate.conf makes it possible to manage personal log
files, as well as system-wide ones.
13. Job Control
13.1 pgrep pkill
Combining the ps command with grep or kill.
13.2 pstree
Lists currently executing processes in "tree" format. The -p option shows the PIDs, as well as the
process names.
13.3 top
Continuously updated display of most cpu-intensive processes. The -b option displays in text mode,
so that the output may be parsed or accessed from a script.
13.4 nohup
Keeps a command running even after user logs off. The command will run as a foreground process
unless followed by &. If you use nohup within a script, consider coupling it with a wait to avoid
creating an orphan or zombie process.
13.5 pidof
Identifies process ID (PID) of a running job. Since job control commands, such as kill and renice act
on the PID of a process (not its name), it is sometimes necessary to identify that PID. The pidof
command is the approximate counterpart to the $PPID internal variable.
13.6 fuser
Identifies the processes (by PID) that are accessing a given file, set of files, or directory. May also be
invoked with the -k option, which kills those processes. This has interesting implications for system
security, especially in scripts preventing unauthorized users from accessing system services.
#bash$ fuser -um /dev/usbdrive
The fuser command, invoked with the -n option identifies the processes accessing a port. This is
especially useful in combination with nmap. 
#fuser -un tcp 25
13.7 init
The init command is the parent of all processes. Called in the final step of a bootup, init determines
the runlevel of the system from /etc/inittab. Invoked by its alias telinit, and by root only.
14. Network
14.1 ifconfig
The ifconfig command is most often used at bootup to set up the interfaces, or to shut them down
when rebooting.
14.2 iwconfig
This is the command set for configuring a wireless network. It is the wireless equivalent of ifconfig,
above.
14.3 ip
General purpose utility for setting up, changing, and analyzing IP (Internet Protocol) networks and
attached devices. This command is part of the iproute2 package.
14.4 route
Show info about or make changes to the kernel routing table.
14.5 tcpdump
Network packet "sniffer." This is a tool for analyzing and troubleshooting traffic on a network by
dumping packet headers that match specified criteria.
Dump ip packet traffic between hosts bozoville and caduceus:
#tcpdump ip host bozoville and caduceus
15. Filesystem
15.1 mount
Mount a filesystem, usually on an external device, such as a floppy or CDROM. The file
/etc/fstab provides a handy listing of available filesystems, partitions, and devices, including
options, that may be automatically or manually mounted. The file /etc/mtab shows the currently
mounted filesystems and partitions (including the virtual ones, such as /proc).
15.2 sync
Forces an immediate write of all updated data from buffers to hard drive (synchronize drive with
buffers). While not strictly necessary, a sync assures the sys admin or user that the data just changed
will survive a sudden power failure. In the olden days, a sync; sync (twice, just to make
absolutely sure) was a useful precautionary measure before a system reboot.
15.3 mkswap
Creates a swap partition or file. The swap area must subsequently be enabled with swapon
15.4 swapon swapoff
Enable / disable swap partitition or file. These commands usually take effect at bootup and shutdown.
15.5 mke2fs
Create a Linux ext2 filesystem. This command must be invoked as root.
15.6 dumpe2fs
Dump (list to stdout) very verbose filesystem info. This must be invoked as root.
15.7 fdisk
15.8 fsck  e2fsck  debugfs
Filesystem check, repair, and debug command set.
fsck: a front end for checking a UNIX filesystem (may invoke other utilities). The actual filesystem
type generally defaults to ext2.
e2fsck: ext2 filesystem checker.
debugfs: ext2 filesystem debugger. One of the uses of this versatile, but dangerous command is to
(attempt to) recover deleted files. For advanced users only!
All of these should be invoked as root, and they can damage or destroy a filesystem if misused
15.9 lsusb  usbmodules
The lsusb command lists all USB (Universal Serial Bus) buses and the devices hooked up to them.
The usbmodules command outputs information about the driver modules for connected USB devices.
15.10 lspci
Lists pci busses present.
15.11 mkbootdisk
Creates a boot floppy which can be used to bring up the system if, for example, the MBR (master boot
record) becomes corrupted. Of special interest is the --iso option, which uses mkisofs to create a
bootable ISO9660 filesystem image suitable for burning a bootable CDR.
16. System Resources
16.1 ulimit
Sets an upper limit on use of system resources. Usually invoked with the -f option, which sets a limit
on file size (ulimit -f 1000 limits files to 1 meg maximum). The -t option limits the coredump
size (ulimit -c 0 eliminates coredumps). Normally, the value of ulimit would be set in
/etc/profile and/or ~/.bash_profile (see Appendix G)
16.2 quota setquota
Display user or group disk quotas.
setquota --Set user or group disk quotas from the command-line.
16.3 umask
User file creation permissions mask. Limit the default file attributes for a particular user. All files
created by that user take on the attributes specified by umask. The (octal) value passed to umask
17. Modules
17.1 lsmod
List installed kernel modules.
17.2 insmod
Force installation of a kernel module (use modprobe instead, when possible). Must be invoked as
root.
17.3 rmmod
Force unloading of a kernel module. Must be invoked as root.
17.4 modprobe
Module loader that is normally invoked automatically in a startup script. Must be invoked as root.
17.5 depmod
Creates module dependency file. Usually invoked from a startup script.
17.6 modinfo
Output information about a loadable module.
17.7 ldd
Show shared lib dependencies for an executable file.
18. Miscellaneous
18.1 watch
Run a command repeatedly, at specified time intervals.
The default is two-second intervals, but this may be changed with the -n option





